First, Mr. McQuillan, tell us something about
your early life, including the names of your
parents, the dates of their birth and death, and
the places of their birth, the place and date of
your birth, and the schools you attended before
you came to Texas A&M.
Well, my father's name was James E. McQuillan. My
mother's name was Aiden McQuillan, and I don't
have the dates of their death.
He worked for the Santa Fe Railroad, and we lived
all up and down the Santa Fe Railroad in Texas.
I started school in Gainesville, Texas. And then
we moved to Sillsby, Texas, where I went to school.
And then we moved to Cleburne, Texas, where I
graduated from Cleburne High School. I entered
here in the fall of 1916. Where were you born? I was
born in Palestine, Texas. And on what date? June
the 9th, 1898.
And I entered here in the fall of 16 and graduated in
the spring of 1920. And
then I went to the University of Wisconsin for a
year and got a master's degree and came back here
and taught in the animal husbandry department for
a year. What were the factors involved in your
choice of Texas A&M? Well, largely because I
didn't have to take any math. I mean, you could go
through the full four-year curriculum. At that
time, you could without taking any mathematics.
Without taking any math. I didn't want any
mathematics. That
is like everything else. Things happen. I didn't
know what I was going to do in the spring of my senior
year, and Dr. Brazell came by. Well, we used to sit
under the trees out there in front of Leggett Hall.
after supper, and he walked by there one day and
asked me what I was going to do, and I said, I didn't
know. He said, how would you like to go to the
University of Wisconsin and take a master's
degree? I said, well, that sounds pretty good. He
said, if you'll do that, and then you come back
here, I'll give you a job, pay you $2,400 a year.
That sounds like lots of money. So that's the way
that happened. And it happened that way. I came
back here and stayed a year. Then I went to Dallas.
and was in the insurance business for three years.
Then I came back here in the fall of 1925
as assistant to Colonel Ashburn, who was
secretary of the Ag Students Association. How
much did you know about Texas A&M before you
enrolled as a student? Oh, practically nothing.
What were your first reactions when you arrived on
campus? Well, I thought to mess all food about it.
Did you have any... Let me rephrase this. Were
there any people to meet? I'm assuming you came by
train. Were there any people there to meet, to
train, to try to recruit you for a particular dorm
or for a particular military company? Well, no,
but there was a senior here from Cleburne that I
knew, and I had come down here to attract meat. And I
was what, in those days, they designated his fish.
And I went, I'm sure, to his company, which was
B-2nd Infantry.
But there was no reception at all. We got off the
train, went up there and found a place. And then
presumably registered almost immediately. And
B-2nd was assigned to what dormitory? Legget
Hall. Legget Hall, one of the newer ones. So you
missed out on some of the good things like carrying
water and wood and all that sort of good stuff.
Yeah, that's right. We had a deluxe
accommodation, you know what I'm saying? Would
you describe a typical day when you were a student?
And I imagine you had over the four years and viewed
the fact that the whole campus was turned into a
military camp for one period of time. But would you
kind of describe a typical day during your student
days as the time you got up and what you did during
the day and the time you went to bed? Well, the first
two years, I guess. Certainly the first year. got
up at Reveille and had calisthenics. And then we
went to breakfast and then to classes. And when
taps blew at night, all the lights went out, and
that was that.
It was a
strictly military organization. It wasn't us.
They weren't very strict, but everything was done
by Bugle.
I missed out on, in the earlier days, they used to
form the cadet corps, which was a whole student
body then, out in front of the old main building,
and they'd march into class for that. We didn't do
that. You just marched to meals. Oh, yes, we
marched to meals. But not to classes. May I pardon?
But not to classes. Not to classes, no. Did you
march to the chapel on Sunday morning? On Sunday
morning, we marched to chapel. I see. So you were in
both the old chapel and in Guyon Hall, I believe,
probably, were you not? Yes, yes. Guyon was built
in 18, I believe. Yeah.
There was so much disturbance, and it gradually
increased. So much disturbance, I think, along my
latter years. That's when they started making
chapel voluntary. Uh-huh. But you mean
disturbance? Oh, they'd cough in and throat
clearing
in the old chapel. I don't remember whether there
were wooden floors or not, but boys... would put a
match or a pencil down on the floor and roll it under
their foot.
Wasn't real now, but sort of, you know. Get enough
of them doing it. Distant thunder, you know.
I doubt if any of us profited much from the chapel
exercises. Well, oftentimes it required chapel
very much. But then, and so they, in your later
years, chapel was voluntary then. Voluntary, I
believe, my last year.
You mentioned you thought that the food in the mess
hall was pretty good. Yeah. How would, could you
expand on that? Well. Tell us a little bit about
what you did get to eat. The main thing I can
remember that we got to eat was toast. They toasted
those great big pieces of bread. I don't know how
they did it. I never had seen any kind of toast like
that when I was growing up. And I grew up in an
average family.
And then once a week we used to have steaks.
And we always had dessert. Of course, I was always a
hungry fellow. I had no trouble with hot cakes, you
know, for breakfast and things of that sort. I
thought it was fine. Did you get much dessert when
you were a fish? Well, from time to time, yeah.
But you did have to give it up occasionally. You had
to give it up occasionally, yeah. Did you ever have
any prune rices? Any what? Any prune races in the
mess hall when you were there? No.
What was life like in the dormitory? Was it pretty
docile or pretty hectic? Well, I think it was
pretty much up to the individual, really. If he let
other people alone, they let him alone. We always,
I can remember, they're always in any, on any
floor, There were, oh, you call them hell raisers
or whatnot, noisy and running around the
hallways.
But if you wanted to study, well, they let you
alone. Did you have a guard mount every night?
Yeah. Was that for all four years, or did they
change it? No, I think just for the first couple of
years. The war came along then, you know, and that
changed a lot of things. So they discontinued
the... What
did the students do for entertainment and
recreation?
Oh, sat around and pulled and of course everybody
in those days was very much interested in
athletics. You wouldn't miss an athletic event of
any kind.
I'm not sure just when it started, probably built
while I was in school. We had a, we called it the
Airdrome, which is over where the chapel is now,
the Chapel of Meditation and Prayer. They had
picture shows a couple of nights a week.
And of course, dances were a big thing in those
days, but there weren't too many of them. How many,
do you remember, how many did you have Oh, let's
see, we think we had a Thanksgiving dance, and we
had an RV dance,
and a final ball. Those were the big ones, and I
guess scattered around probably, but there were
no smaller dances like a departmental group or
anything of that sort. What about individual
classes? I think now some of the individual
classes, like the freshmen, juniors, and seniors
or something, have a dance. Well, we had a junior
ball. The juniors had a banquet, and I guess with a
dance afterwards. I don't remember the dance part
particularly. I believe in connection with the
junior banquet, I just checked the longhorn for
your senior year, and I believe there was some
indication that you were a master or toastmaster
at that junior banquet, at a junior banquet. Yeah,
that's right. I believe there was some mention
made of your being conducted into the mess hall by a
brilliant plan. Well, the big deal in those days
was for the sophomores to kidnap the junior
toastmaster. To start with, they had to find out
who he was. And, uh, It just got worse and worse as an
activity carried to extreme. And it got to where
they'd send her on maybe four or five and kidnap all
of
them. They did not kidnap me.
I had some friends here on the campus and a
classmate. who was kin to them, and they hid me in
their house where they lived up on the campus, and
spirited me into the mess hall without any trouble
really, and I put on woman's clothes and walked on
in. You were in disguise then. It had been hinted to
me that there was this tradition, so to speak, of
kidnapping the Toastmaster. Was the toastmaster
for the junior banquet a junior? Yes, I'm sure he
was. So it would have been in your junior year that
you were toastmaster for the junior banquet. And I
had understood that the sophomores attempted to
kidnap this person. They were quite elaborate. It
just got to be a nuisance. And the college finally
just said, you're not going to have any more of
that. Just discontinued the junior banquet then.
What was the procedure of choosing a toastmaster?
I don't know. You don't remember? I don't know, I
guess. class elected them, I don't know. Well it
would have had to been by secret ballot and only a
select few would know then who it was.
We know that you know the upperclassmen and
primarily say the sophomores but the rest of them
could choose a fish as their man, and that kind of
gave them the privilege of assigning duties of one
sort or another to the freshmen. But can you tell us
about any other kinds of privileges that
upperclassmen had as opposed to what freshmen
might do?
No, and the practice of freshmen doing room
service, orderly work, that came after my time. I
think it was just starting, probably my last year.
I never was in anybody's room orderly. But that got
to be pretty worrisome, too. Pretty. I mean,
making the beds and getting a whole room ready for
inspection. Sweeping out the room. Cleaning
rifles and... Do what? Cleaning rifles. Yeah,
just do anything that the sophomore wanted to.
I don't know just how long that lasted. It finally
played out. Did you have any favorite
instructors?
And if so, could you tell us a little bit about them?
Well, John Burns, of course, was my senior
instructor. He was head of the age department, and
we all were very fond of him.
Tommy Mayo, I don't know that I ever had a class
under Tommy Mayo, but I have always felt like, as a
teacher, he exerted more influence on more
students than any professor I knew.
Of course, in those days, and I think it, I don't
know how it is right now, but it got to where it was
just the opposite. We went overboard on
ingratiating ourselves with your teacher. That
fell into ill repute somewhere along the line
later. That was brown noses, you know, and stuff
like that. But I used to figure when I could get that
teacher to call me Mac, I had it made. And I wasn't
about to do anything that I thought he didn't like.
But that's frown, I don't know whether it still is
or not, but for many, many years, that was very,
that's frowned on, you know. I'm not sure. I guess
it isn't quite as much frowned upon as it once was.
Well, I hope not, because it's a silly sort of a
thing. Yeah. Did the teachers commonly refer to
the students as, like, Mr. McQuillan? Or did they
use your given name? Well, I think occasionally
they did. But I would guess that most of them just
called you your last name, or your nickname, or
your given name. But if you could get the professor
or instructor to use your nickname, you would have
it more... I thought I had it made.
You mentioned Dr. Bazell somewhat earlier in the
statement he had made to you as your senior year.
What, in general, were the attitudes of the
students toward Dr. Buzell as president? I think
real fine, real fine. He
was an excitable man, really. He got excited about
Haitian and one thing or another, but he was very
human, and I think that he had, during my time, had
an excellent relationship with student body. He
was able to make the transition from being
president of an all-girls school to an all-male
military school reasonably well. He'd been
there, what, two or three years by the time you
first came in, in 14, I believe.
What about the commandant? Well, he was fair game
for everybody. Just to give them considerable
trouble. In what kind of, what types of ways did you
give him trouble? Oh, just dislike and
occasionally
throwing rocks at his house. That was very seldom
as far as I know, but did happen.
But just didn't like the commandant. Who was
commandant? Well, Colonel Muller was the
principal commandant when I was in school. He was a
tough disciplinarian, but we came to have a pretty
sound respect for him. He was fair.
He was a martinet, but he got along pretty good. But
you did try to give him a hard time occasionally.
Yeah. Well, of course, in those days, kids were
less inclined, I think, to rebel.
Well, it's like mess hall food. Now, of course, all
through the years, there's been a complaint about
mess hall food. Less now, I hear, than any time I can
remember. But by and large, we thought it was
pretty good eating. Yeah, well, I presume that...
The complaints would stem primarily from the lack
of variety as opposed to insufficient quantity
and bad taste of it. I think they have such a wide
variety now that most of them probably never ate so
well in their
lives. One of the things which I feel makes Texas
A&M the unique school that it is is the number of
traditions which are carried on by the student
body. Do you remember during your years as a
student, did you have a bonfire, yell practice,
silver taps? We had yell practice, and I don't
think we had a bonfire when I was in school. I don't
remember one. I never did work on one.
I think we had silver taps. I think they've
embellished it since then. I don't think we went
out and formed anything of that sort. I think it's
blue silver taps. Whenever someone, whenever a
student died.
I think it's like so many of those things, they add
on to them year by year by year. It's sort of like the
bonfire. I think, as far as I can remember, one of
the earlier days, if they had a bonfire with just a
few apple barrels, apple crates piled up out there
in Drillfield and all of us cutting down trees.
What about muster? I don't recall anything about
the muster when I was in school. We didn't have a
student muster. As there is now. Yeah. As a matter
of fact, we built that tradition up.
There had been a tradition for many years about A&M
clubs meeting on April 21st. promoted
particularly didn't amount to much and sometime
along I guess in the late 30s or early 40s we decided
we could build that thing up to a major proposition
and we did.
But I don't recall it.
The story I'd heard about the student body in 1903
wanting to have a ceremony of some sort to
celebrate Texas' independence. Well, they
wanted a holiday is what they wanted. And I had
understood that was the origin of the annual
muster. Yeah, that was. And I think that's pretty
well established. That actually happened. They
marched on the president's house. But as I say,
because they weren't going to have any holiday.
And my guess is that some student got up and said,
let's go over and ask the president about this
business. And we really went. And he got out pretty
good and said, well, we'll take a holiday this
morning.
Let's go back to class this afternoon. And from
here on out, though, we're going to have a
celebration on April 21st. So that's the way it
started. But it smoldered along all those years
until we got rid of building up. Now, whereas they
had a holiday and not much of a ceremony, today we
have a big ceremony and no holiday. That was the
middle of the ceremony. What about airing out? Did
you get aired out a number of times when you were a
fish? No. No, that's another later development. I
don't have any recollection of any airing out.
Well, it might have been just in your particular
dormitory that you weren't aired out. I was going
to say, I'm sure there was a tremendous difference
in dormitories or military units.
We know that from time to time there were girls
attending classes. Did you have any girls in any
classes that you attended? No. Do you know of any
girls who were on campus in classes when you were a
student?
No, I don't believe I did. Someone told me just
recently that that there was a continuing
increase in the number of girls under Dr. Bazell's
administration as president, and that his desire
to increase the number of girls was one of the
factors in his departure.
Oh, I doubt that. After all, he
was offered a job at a major state university that I
think entirely logical that he accepted it. Step
up the ladder. That's right, yeah. Now, Bazell was
not one to hold back on a scrap. He battled the board
of directors or anybody else, but I don't, I never
did know of any particular trouble he got into.
Well, I didn't, I really had the impression that he
was in trouble, but that there might have been some
pressure. I would guess that his inclination was
all towards the girls. He
was a very liberal man, I mean by that. He was a
humanistic man as compared to engineering,
something of that sort.
Okay. I noted in your clippings about you and your
write-up in the Longhorn that you participated in
athletics quite a bit. Did the students who were on
the college teams enjoy privileges that the
normal students didn't have? Well, I think only we
had a training table. That's as far as I know it, but
I think that was just regular food. It was just
served at separate times, separate hours. This
would accommodate your practices. I presume
occasionally you were able to misdrill because of
practice, but generally you had to abide by the
other rules that the students
had.
We know that a lot of students worked while they
were in school. Did you ever have a job while you
were in school? Oh, I had various odd jobs. I
cleaned test tubes in the biology department once
a term, and I maintained tennis courts another
term, but nothing regular.
I wasn't what I'd call a working student.
Well, I could imagine with the amount of practice
you would have to do in basketball, and I think you
ran track one year or so. You would occupy a lot of
your time. You wouldn't have much time for
working. Well, of course, there again, finance
was so simple in those days. You paid your fee at the
beginning of school, and that carries you through
the semester. And it's covered board, room, and
laundry. And you already had your uniform, and
there wasn't much spent money for.
Oh, we had a lot of students working, but then it
wasn't the financial struggle that it is today, if
you went at all.
Of course, there were always a few students that
did struggle, and I guess just lived from hand to
mouth, practically, but there weren't very many
of them. Much of that came a little bit later, I
would imagine, during the Depression, in the
project houses and that sort
of thing.